If you buy something through a link on this page, we may earn a small commission. How this works. CBD gummies are a form of cannabidiol (CBD) edibles. These are foods containing the therapeutic compound CBD, which comes from the marijuana plant. Gummies or other edibles can be an easy, tasty, and discreet way of ingesting CBD. Some common reasons for taking CBD include pain management and relief from anxiety or depression. Keep reading to learn more about some of the top CBD gummies available for these conditions. Please note that the writer of this article has not tried any of these products and that all information is purely research-based. Please also be aware that some of the products below do not have a Certificate of Analysis (COA). The manufacturer of each product is responsible for all claims regarding what it contains. Is CBD Legal? Hemp-derived CBD products (with less than 0. 3 percent THC) are legal on the federal level, but are still illegal under some state laws. Marijuana-derived CBD products are illegal on the federal level, but are legal under some state laws. Check your state’s laws and those of anywhere you travel. Keep in mind that nonprescription CBD products are not FDA-approved, and may be inaccurately labeled. CBD is one of several cannabinoids in the cannabis plant. Learn more about the cannabis plant in general here. It is important to note that there are three main variations of CBD that various gummies use. They are: Full-spectrum CBD: This CBD contains all the phytochemicals that occur naturally in the cannabis plant, such as various other cannabinoids, terpenes, and oils. It also contains some trace amounts of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), which is the psychoactive compound in marijuana that produces the “ high ” effect. Broad-spectrum CBD: This CBD contains all the phytochemicals that are in the cannabis plant but no THC. CBD isolate: CBD isolate is the pure form of CBD. . Due to a lack of regulation, companies and consumers sometimes confuse these terms — particularly broad-spectrum CBD and CBD isolate — and use them incorrectly. Learn more about CBD isolate here. Learn more about terpenes here. CBD may reduce pain sensations in the body, including neuropathic pain. It may also limit inflammation. CBD gummies that may help those seeking pain relief include:These gummies each contain 5 milligrams (mg) of organically farmed, broad-spectrum (according to them) CBD. This means that they also provide several other compounds from the cannabis plant, excluding THC. Research indicates that when it comes to relieving pain and swelling, broad-spectrum CBD and full-spectrum CBD are more effective than CBD isolate. However, the COA for this product states that it actually contains no terpenes or THC, making it a product containing CBD isolate. The lack of regulation of CBD product claims illustrates why people need to be careful with them. These gummies also contain turmeric, which has anti-inflammatory properties and aids in the management of several anti-inflammatory conditions. Spirulina, another ingredient in these gummies, may have antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. CBDfx’s gummies are vegan and free from artificial sweeteners and high fructose corn syrup. The company claim that they contain less than 0. 3% THC, which is the maximum legally allowed dose. However, the COA states that this product contains 0% THC. CBDfx Turmeric and Spirulina Gummies are available to purchase online. At 5 mg of CBD per gummy, this +PlusCBD Oil product is another low dose CBD edible. The gummies are gluten-free, vegan, and contain no artificial ingredients. Each gummy contains full-spectrum hemp extracts and several phytonutrients, including fatty acids and vitamin E, both of which can act as anti-inflammatories. There is no available COA for this product. +PlusCBD Oil Gummies are available to purchase online. Individuals requiring a more potent product may wish to consider Pure Relief CBD Gummies. As each gummy contains 30 mg of CBD, the company recommend a daily dose of one gummy. However, they suggest that individuals can increase this dose if it does not meet their needs. Pure Relief gummies contain CBD isolate, meaning that they are completely free of THC. For those whose pain keeps them awake at night, Pure Relief also make a nighttime version of these gummies containing melatonin, which aids sleep. Please note that the COA data for this product are outdated and only test for potency. Pure Relief CBD Gummies are available to purchase online. Happy Hemp offer a variety of gummies and package sizes. Their gummy bears each contain 10–12 mg of CBD. The recommended dosage is one to three bears every 6–8 hours, as the person requires. These dosage recommendations allow individuals flexibility in managing their pain and inflammation throughout the day. However, this product also has an outdated COA, making it difficult to determine the quality and safety. Happy Hemp CBD Gummies are available to purchase online. These gummies feature a blend of more than 80 naturally occurring phytocannabinoids, terpenes, and flavonoids. For added pain relief, they also include ginger and turmeric, two natural anti-inflammatories. Each gummy contains 10 mg of full-spectrum CBD. Charlotte’s Web Recovery CBD Gummies are available to purchase online. Learn more about CBD for pain relief here. Several studies indicate that CBD has the potential to act as an antidepressant. Gummies that may help those with depression include:Sunday Scaries CBD Gummies contain full-spectrum CBD, along with vitamins B-12 and D-3. People can choose either gelatin-based or vegan gummies. These gummies may be beneficial for those with depression because there is a link between low vitamin D status and the symptoms of depression. Additionally, research has linked deficiencies in B-12 (and other B vitamins) with depression. Although more research is necessary to understand these links fully, getting extra vitamin B-12 or D from these gummies is unlikely to be harmful, and it could potentially be helpful. Each gummy contains 10 mg of CBD, and the company recommend taking two or three gummies as necessary. Please note that this product requires a subscription. The COA contains limited results, making it difficult to demonstrate safety and quality. Sunday Scaries CBD Gummies are available to purchase online. At 21 mg of CBD per gummy, the Verma Farms gummies provide a slightly higher dose than many other CBD gummies. Made using American hemp, these gummies contain no THC or pesticides and use CBD isolate. CBD isolate products may effectively alleviate depression, so these gummies could be a good choice for those with depression who do not wish to ingest THC. One study found that participants reported the greatest reduction in perceived depression symptoms when they used cannabis with a relatively low level of THC and a relatively high level of CBD. Please note, this product has no visible COA, so it is difficult to verify the company’s claims. Verma Farms CBD Gummies are available to purchase online. These CBD gummies are vegan, gluten-free, allergen-free, and non-GMO. Each gummy delivers 30 mg of 99% pure CBD isolate, and there are 25 gummies of varying flavors in a bottle. CBDistillery Nighttime Gummies may be a good option for people with depression who also experience difficulty falling or staying asleep. Sleep problems are a hallmark of depression. Along with CBD, each nighttime gummy contains 1. 5 mg of melatonin, which may aid sleep. There is also a regular version of these gummies available, which is free from melatonin. Please note, the COA for this product is only available to view after purchase. CBDistillery Nighttime Gummies are available to purchase online. Learn more about CBD for depression here. Several studies suggest that CBD has anti-anxiety effects, possibly because it alters the brain’s response to the chemical serotonin. Gummies to try for anxiety relief include:The Charlotte’s Web Calm blend contains lemon balm and l-theanine, along with a proprietary hemp product featuring more than 80 naturally occurring phytocannabinoids, terpenes, and flavonoids. Research indicates that lemon balm may improve various aspects of mood and reduce anxiety levels. L-theanine is an amino acid that may promote relaxation without causing drowsiness. Natural fruit and vegetable juices provide the flavor in these gummies, which contain 10 mg of full-spectrum CBD. The recommended dose is two gummies daily, as necessary. Charlotte’s Web Calm CBD Gummies are available to purchase online. Green Roads claim that their Relax Bears provide relaxation with every bite. The bears are non-GMO and free from THC. Each gummy provides 10 mg of hemp-derived cannabinoid extracts for a low-to-moderate dose. Green Roads Relax Bears are available to purchase online. Anxiety can often interfere with sleep, keeping people awake for longer than usual. These gummies each provide 15 mg of broad-spectrum CBD and 5 mg of melatonin. Other ingredients include l-theanine, Scutellaria, and Passiflora for relaxation and calm. Therefore, these gummies may promote deeper sleep and morning wakefulness. The company suggest one or two gummies per serving. Hemp Bombs CBD Sleep Gummies are available to purchase online. Learn more about CBD for anxiety here. CBD gummies are an easy and discreet way of taking CBD for pain relief, depression, anxiety, or other conditions. There are many CBD products on the market, some of which are likely to be better than others. At present, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) do not approve any over-the-counter CBD products. Therefore, individuals should carry out their own research. They should consider the type of CBD that a product contains, whether full-spectrum or isolate. If full-spectrum, it is important to check that it contains less than 0. 3% THC to comply with legislation. Those new to CBD may wish to start with a low-dose option, such as 5 mg, and increase their intake gradually as their symptoms require. It is also advisable to look for companies that provide proof of independent, third party lab testing to ensure that their products actually contain the listed ingredients. If people decide that they would like to use CBD for anxiety or depression, they should speak to a healthcare professional first, as there is a chance that the CBD may interact with other anti-anxiety medications.