Instead of targeting the tricky protein behind Parkinson’s, a new compound attacks the RNA that produces it. Parkinson’s disease is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by tremor, slowness of movement, limb rigidity, and walking and balance issues. In Parkinson’s, a misfolded protein named α-synuclein causes the degeneration and destruction of brain cells. The more α-synuclein builds up, the more neurons die. Now, scientists from Rutgers University in New Brunswick, NJ, and Scripps Research in Jupiter, Florida, have developed a way to decrease the amount of α-synuclein the body produces. New technology allowed scientists to identify a compound that shuts down the messenger RNA (mRNA) coding for the destructive protein, preventing the production of α-synuclein and the progression of Parkinson’s. The researchers’ NIH-funded study appears in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. According to the Parkinson’s Foundation, over 10 million people worldwide are living with Parkinson’s disease, with 1 million of those being in the United States. Each year, about 60,000 US. adults receive a diagnosis of the disease. The incidence of Parkinson’s increases with age, although about 4% of people who receive a diagnosis are less than 50 years old. Men are 1. 5 times more likely to develop Parkinson’s than women. “ Currently, there is no cure for Parkinson’s disease, and it is truly a devastating disease, ” says neurology professor M. Maral Mouradian of Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School Institute for Neurological Therapeutics, and a co-author of the study. Numerous other approaches have attempted to address the production and buildup of α-synuclein, but since the protein has no regular structure and continually changes shape, it has proven difficult to hit with medication. “ Several other experimental drugs, ” says Mouradian, “ currently being tested for Parkinson’s disease are antibodies that target a very late stage of α-synuclein protein aggregates. ” “ We want to prevent these protein clumps from forming in the first place before they do damage and lead to advancing disease. ” The new research began when Mouradian reached out to chemistry professor Matthew D. Disney of Scripps to explore the potential for a new technology that Disney had invented for matching RNA structures with small-molecules or drug-like compounds. The scientists had a hunch that they might find a match for the mRNA that coded for α-synuclein and that the mRNA might offer a more stable, predictable target than α-synuclein itself. The hunch paid off. “ For the first time, we discovered a drug-like compound that has the potential to slow down the disease before it advances through an entirely new approach, ” says Mouradian. They named their compound Synucleozid, and Mouradian describes it as “ highly promising. ” While Synucleozid may be most effective in people with minimal symptoms and who are in the early stages of Parkinson’s, Mouradian says, “ This new compound has the potential to […] change the course of life for people with this devastating disease. ” Synucleozid may be of value beyond Parkinson’s since α-synuclein has implications in dementia with Lewy Bodies, another progressive condition that affects 1 million people in the US. alone. The study also makes clear the promise of Disney’s RNA/protein-matching technology. As Mouradian says, “ The reach of our study could go beyond people with Parkinson’s disease to many other neurodegenerative diseases. ” “ It is a classic example of how interdisciplinary research leads to significant change. ”