Knowing the correct Tylenol dosage for infants is important. Tylenol, when used correctly, is a safe and effective option for managing pain and fevers. The active ingredient, acetaminophen, also comes in a generic form. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommend consulting a pediatrician before giving Tylenol or other acetaminophen-based drugs to babies under 3 months old. Tylenol can harm the liver, and the difference between a safe dose and a potentially dangerous one is relatively small. People should carefully follow the instructions on labels and a doctor’s advice. If the first dose does not work, do not give a child more Tylenol. The American Academy of Pediatrics also recommend waiting until an infant is 6 months or older before giving them nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen (Advil) or naproxen (Aleve). Tylenol is a safe alternative to these drugs in younger babies. Below, we investigate how much Tylenol is safe for infants and older children and describe the drug’s uses and side effects. In babies who are at least 3 months old, Tylenol can safely manage various symptoms, including: a fever, pain, including teething pain , muscle aches , chills, lethargy , pain-related nursing difficulties . Tylenol does not treat or cure the illnesses that cause these symptoms, it only reduces the symptoms themselves. The drug cannot cure a tooth infection, ear infection, or other common childhood maladies. It is crucial to treat the underlying issue, rather than rely solely on Tylenol. Doctors do not fully understand how the drug works, though it may block chemicals that help the body produce pain signals. The right dosage of this medication depends on the formulation. Infants’ Tylenol and Children’s Tylenol come in the same strength: 160 milligrams (mg) per 5 milliliters (ml). Use the child’s weight to determine the right dosage of this formulation, as follows:Babies can have Tylenol every 4–6 hours, as needed, but do not exceed 5 doses in 24 hours. A discontinued form of Tylenol comes in a formula of 80 mg per 0. 8 ml. Manufacturers no longer sell this, and it is too old to safely use, so discard and replace it. Some strategies to ensure that an infant gets the right dosage include: Have multiple caregivers verify the correct dosage on the package, then verify that the correct amount is in the syringe. , Make a note of each dose and the time that it was given. Weigh the baby before giving them the medication. . If weighing the baby is not possible, base the dosage on the baby’s last known weight. It is not safe to assume that they have moved into the next weight range. Some potential side effects of Tylenol include: a headache, nausea and vomiting , bruising, bleeding , trouble urinating . Tylenol is generally safe if people use it correctly. However, it does present some additional risks, such as: A rash can develop even in people who have taken Tylenol in the past and experienced no problems. had no adverse effects previously. If an infant develops red spots or any other type of rash while taking Tylenol, stop giving them the drug and contact a doctor. Any drug can cause an allergic reaction, and these reactions can range from very mild to life threatening. If a baby develops a rash, breathing trouble, itchy skin, or any other symptoms while taking Tylenol, call a doctor. If the baby has trouble breathing or the rash spreads quickly, call 911 or otherwise seek emergency medical aid. It can be easier to overdose on Tylenol than on some other drugs. People should never give or take more than the recommended dose. Also, it is important not to use Tylenol for longer than is necessary. Taking too much Tylenol can cause serious and even fatal liver damage. It is crucial never to use Tylenol alongside another drug that contains acetaminophen. Call a doctor immediately if a baby develops side effects of Tylenol, including: nausea or vomiting , trouble urinating , unusual bruising. Also, consult a doctor if: Tylenol does not ease a fever or relieve pain. , Any symptoms have not improved within a few days. , An infant younger than 3 months shows any signs of illness. . Call 911 or go to an emergency room if a baby: develops a widespread rash after taking Tylenol, has trouble breathing after taking the drug, takes significantly more than the recommended dosage, has a yellow or green tinge to the skin or the whites of the eyes . Tylenol can relieve some symptoms of common illnesses, including pain and a fever, helping babies and their caregivers sleep better. It is usually safe to use Tylenol with prescription drugs. Doing so can make a baby more comfortable while the prescription medication treats the underlying issue. If a person has any questions about using Infants’ Tylenol, they should contact a healthcare provider. Never give a child more than the recommended dosage.