The calf muscles run from the back of the knee to about halfway down the lower leg. Tightness in these muscles can cause soreness and pain. People may develop tight calf muscles as a result of overactivity or insufficient stretching. Calf stretches can help relieve associated soreness and pain. However, these stretches are unlikely to provide relief from other causes of calf pain — such as electrolyte, fluid, or nutrient deficiencies. In some people, calf pain results from more serious underlying medical conditions, such as deep vein thrombosis and peripheral vascular disease. These require medical attention. In this article, we describe some stretches that can help relax tight calf muscles and relieve any associated discomfort. The calf is in the back of the lower leg, below the knee. It consists of two muscles: the gastrocnemius and the soleus. Muscle tightness and cramps commonly occur in the gastrocnemius muscle. According to the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons (AAOS), some researchers believe that cramps result from abnormalities in the mechanisms that control muscle contractions. These may develop because of muscle fatigue or insufficient stretching. Regular stretching can improve a person’s range of motion, allowing the muscles to lengthen and contract more vigorously during exercise. By improving contraction in the muscles, stretching can help prevent cramping and tightness. The AAOS caution that people should always warm up before stretching. People can do this by running slowly in place or walking briskly for a few minutes. The AAOS recommend the following calf stretches in their foot and ankle conditioning program, which aims to help people return to daily activities and sports following an injury or surgery. These stretches also provide a good way for anyone to alleviate calf tightness. There are two general techniques for stretching the calf muscles. One requires a wall, and the other does not. Step 1: Stand about an arm’s length in front of a wall. Place the right leg in front of the left. Reach both arms to the wall. Step 2: Press the back (left) heel into the floor and straighten the back leg while keeping the front leg bent. Hold this position for 15–20 seconds. Step 3: Repeat the stretch on the opposite side. Step 1: Place the right leg in front of the left leg. Step 2: Shift the body’s weight on to the front (right) leg, while keeping the back heel pressed into the floor. Hold this position for 15–20 seconds. Step 3: Repeat the stretch on the opposite side. A person should feel the stretch down their calf muscle and into their heel. If this is not the case, slide the back leg further away until you feel the stretch. Avoid arching the back when performing this stretch. This stretch requires the use of a wall. Step 1: Stand with the right leg in front of the left leg. Step 2: Lightly bend the back (left) knee and point the toes inward a little. Press both hands against the wall. Step 3: Keeping both heels flat on the ground, press the hips toward the wall. Hold the position for 30 seconds. Step 4: Repeat the stretch on the opposite side. When performing this stretch, try to keep the hips centered over both feet and avoid leaning to one side. This stretch requires a hand towel. Step 1: Sit on the floor with both legs straight out in front. Step 2: Loop the hand towel around the ball of one foot. Hold both ends of the towel. Step 3: Keeping the legs straight, pull the towel toward the body, and hold the position for 30 seconds. Then, relax for 30 seconds. Step 4: Repeat the stretch three times, then do the same on the other side. Control the intensity of the stretch by pulling harder on the towel, if necessary. The back should be straight for the duration of the stretch. This requires a tabletop or chair for support. Step 1: Stand with equal body weight on each foot. Hold on to a tabletop or the back of a chair for balance. Step 2: Bend the right knee and lift the right foot. The left foot should take all of the body’s weight. Step 3: Keeping the left leg straight, raise the left heel as high as possible. Lower it, and repeat this movement 10 times. Step 4: Switch to the opposite side. These exercises require the use of an elastic stretch band that provides comfortable resistance. Each stretch can help strengthen the calf muscles, providing better support for the lower leg, foot, and ankle. Strengthening these muscles can also help prevent injuries. Step 1: Sit on the floor with legs straight out in front. Step 2: Anchor the elastic band tightly around a stable piece of furniture, such as a heavy chair or table. Wrap the opposite end of the band around the foot. Step 3: Pull the toes toward the body, then slowly return them to the starting position. Step 4: Repeat the movement 10 times, then change to the opposite side. Step 1: Sit on the floor with the legs straight out in front. Step 2: Wrap one end of the elastic band around one foot, and hold the opposite end. Step 3: Gently point the toes forward, then slowly return to the starting position. Step 4: Repeat this movement 10 times, then change to the opposite side. Make sure the elastic band is providing comfortable resistance to the movements. If it is not, sit farther from the piece of furniture or pull harder on the band. Massages and cold or hot compresses can also help relax tight calf muscles and relieve associated discomfort. A pharmacist or doctor can recommend the right treatments to try. Some people require a conditioning and stretching program that is tailored to their needs and goals. A physiotherapist or orthopedic surgeon can help develop a personalized program. Stretches can help relieve tightness and pain in the calf muscles when the discomfort results from overactivity or insufficient stretching. Massages and cold or hot compresses can also help. However, calf pain and discomfort sometimes result from underlying medical conditions, such as nutrient imbalances or deficiencies, peripheral vascular disease, or deep vein thrombosis. In this case, stretching is not an appropriate treatment, and a doctor should advise about the next steps.