Bird flu, also known as avian flu or avian influenza, is an infectious disease caused by any of the influenza type A viruses that normally infect birds. Scientists have identified 16 different types of bird flu, including H5N1, H7N9, and H1N1, also known as swine flu. The name depends on the number of proteins on the surface of the virus. Some are more dangerous than others. It is rare for these diseases to affect humans, but when they do, they can be very dangerous, leading to severe respiratory problems and death. Avian influenza is known as an epizootic disease, because it can cross the species barrier and pass between humans and animals. The disease affects several types of birds, including farmed poultry, such as chickens, geese, turkeys, and ducks, wild birds, and pet birds. It spreads through the saliva, nasal secretions, feces, and feed of birds, and it can be passed between different bird species. There is evidence that both H5N1 and H1N1 can affect other domestic animals, including cats. The H5N1 type is the strain most likely to cause illness in humans, but it is rare for people to catch it. Most cases are linked to contact with infected birds or contaminated poultry equipment. A person can catch bird flu if sufficient virus enters the mouth, nose or eyes, or if it is inhaled, for example, by breathing in droplets or dust in the air, or through contact with a contaminated item, such as cages. Treading on bird droppings and walking to another area could also spread the virus. The danger with the different subtypes of influenza is that they can exchange genes and mutate. If the viruses change, they could start to transmit between people, and the disease could spread globally. Scientists first isolated H5N1 virus on a farmed goose, in China, in 1996. The following year, the first known human infections occurred in Hong Kong, with 18 reported cases and six fatalities. Flu. gov notes that 650 human infections with H5N1 viruses have been reported to the World Health Organization (WHO) since 2003, across 15 countries. About 60 percent of these people died from their illness. In 2013, The BMJ reported that H7N9 had been passed from one human to another, in China. A father caught H7N9 after close contact with live birds, and passed on the infection to his daughter while in the hospital. In March 2016, China reported 29 cases of H7N9 infection, including 11 fatalities. Most of these people were exposed to poultry, but one woman, who was taking care of her brother, had no direct contact with birds. The symptoms of avian flu are similar to those of human seasonal flu, but they will be more severe, and the patient can get worse very quickly. They include: A cough, usually dry, and a hoarse voice, A temperature over 38 degrees Celsius, Aching bones, joints and muscles, Bleeding from the nose and possibly when coughing, Blocked or runny nose, Chest pain, Cold sweats and chills, Fatigue, Headache, Loss of appetite, Sleeping difficulties, Stomach upset, sometimes diarrhea, Bleeding from the gums. Breathing difficulties may develop about 5 days after symptoms first appear. Pneumonia and multiple organ failure can occur, leading to death. The incubation period, or the time it takes for symptoms to appear, is normally from 2 to 8 days after infection. They can last for up to 17 days. This is longer than for seasonal flu, in which symptoms normally appear after 2 to 3 days. To diagnose avian flu, a doctor will ask about recent travel and contact with birds, and they may take a throat or nose swab for testing in the lab, preferably within 4 to 5 days of symptoms appearing. The fatality rate among patients admitted to hospital is high, but the actual total rate may be lower, as patients with mild symptoms may not seek medical help. The World Health Organization (WHO) suggest that antiviral medications, such as oseltamivir, or Tamiflu, given as soon as possible, can reduce the chance of the virus spreading, and improve the chances of survival. For the best outcome, the patient should start taking Tamiflu within 48 hours of symptoms appearing, but given the high mortality rate, Tamiflu is recommended even at the later stages. If a person has, or might have, avian flu they will probably have to stay at home. If they are in the hospital, they will be in isolation, away from other patients. People can catch bird flu if they have unprotected contact with dead or infected birds, or with contaminated surfaces. In rare cases there is no record of direct contact with infected birds, suggesting that human-to-human transmission is occasionally possible. This includes touching the birds or their saliva and other secretions, breathing in the dried bird droppings, slaughtering infected birds or preparing them for cooking, or handling poultry in markets. It can also spread on the feet and bodies of animals or people. People cannot become infected from eating well-cooked poultry or eggs, but cases have been linked to raw, contaminated blood. The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) advise cooking eggs until the yolk and white are both firm. According to the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), the US. has “ the strongest [avian influenza] surveillance program in the world, ” to ensure a safe food supply. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend avoiding unprotected contact with sick or dead birds and contaminated environments. People who work in poultry-related environments should follow biosecurity and infection control protocols. The spread of disease can also be reduced through the following hygiene rules: Hand hygiene: Wash hands with warm water and soap before and after using the toilet, before preparing meals and after coughing. Coughing: Cough into the inner part of the elbow, not the hand. If possible, use a tissue, and dispose of it carefully. Isolation: At the doctor’s office, patients who may have bird flu, might be isolated from other patients and asked to wear a surgical mask. Vaccinations: Keep inoculations up-to-date, especially seasonal flu and pneumococcal vaccines. Food preparation: Use separate utensils when preparing cooked and raw meats, and wash hands with soap and water before and after handling raw poultry. . The US. government maintains a national stockpile of vaccines for public health emergencies, for example, in the case of an outbreak of H5N1. There is no vaccine against other strains of avian flu, but the annual flu jab may provide some protection against some types. So far, it has been rare for humans to become infected with bird flu, and extremely rare for one person to pass it to another. However, if a patient with seasonal human flu also became infected with avian flu, the virus could mutate, and the new form might be able to spread between humans. This could lead to a global pandemic, with devastating consequences. With a death rate of 60 percent for H5N1, a global pandemic could put millions at risk. If bird flu started spreading globally, it might be difficult to stop, because it is transmitted between different species of birds, and migration of birds cannot be controlled. Therefore, it is important to prevent it from starting. By monitoring migration patterns, government authorities are better able to make plans and to protect livestock. Controlling outbreaks of both seasonal flu can help to reduce the chance of a bird flu virus coming into contact with a human flu virus and mutating. Having the recommended seasonal flu jab can protect against a number of influenza types, and decrease the risk of bird flu spreading among humans. Find out what makes a flu pandemic.