Occasionally, people have a buzzing, tingling, or vibrating sensation in or around the vagina. The feeling may come and go, and it can range in intensity. It may be a mild irritation or a painful spasm. Each person may have a different experience. In most cases, this vibrating sensation is not a cause for concern. Feeling a slight, unexpected vibration in the vagina can be a normal experience, and there are several benign causes. Keep reading for more information about what causes a vibrating vagina and what to do about it. The cause of this feeling is not always clear. For many people, the sensation comes and goes sporadically. As a result, a person may hesitate to report it to a doctor or discuss it with others. This may partly explain why there is a lack of research into this vaginal sensation. Nonetheless, some potential causes of vibrating in or around the vagina are:The pelvic floor is a layer of muscles and ligaments that connect the pelvic bone to the base of the spine. It supports various organs and structures, including the rectum and bladder. In females, the pelvic floor muscles also support the uterus and surround the vagina. The term pelvic floor dysfunction (PFD) describes a decrease in control of the muscles of the pelvic floor. People with this condition may have weak or tight pelvic floor muscles. PFD can cause a variety of symptoms, including muscle spasms. When the pelvic floor muscles spasm, this may feel like a vibration in the vagina. Other potential symptoms of PFD include: increased frequency of urination, painful urination, incomplete bladder emptying, constipation, painful bowel movements, unexplained pain in the lower back, genitals, or rectum, pain during or after sexual stimulation or intercourse . Issues with the pelvic floor are particularly common after pregnancy and childbirth. A muscle spasm is a sudden or involuntary contraction of one or more muscles. When muscle spasms occur, they may cause a vibrating sensation. As the North American Spine Society note, the following factors may cause or contribute to muscle spasms: anxiety, stress, fatigue , nutritional deficiencies . Muscle spasms can also occur as a reaction to certain drugs, such as: caffeine, pseudoephedrine, albuterol, the combination medication Adderall. In most cases, muscle spasms are benign and do not require treatment. However, they can be symptomatic of an underlying neurological condition. In this case, additional symptoms may also be present. These may include: muscle weakness, muscle atrophy, numbness or tingling, an abnormal gait, problems with speech or swallowing. Vaginismus is a health condition that involves spasms of the pelvic floor muscles around the vagina. It can cause pain at the vaginal opening. The Center for Young Women’s Health report that vaginismus is a reflexive action. It generally happens when someone is trying to place something into the vagina. Anyone with vaginismus may, therefore, experience pain during pelvic examinations, sexual intercourse, or when inserting a tampon. Researchers do not know the exact cause of vaginismus. It may be related to previous pain or discomfort from any of the following: inserting a tampon for the first time, a pelvic examination, a sexual assault. Speak to a doctor if vibrating sensations in or around the vagina become more frequent or intense. A person should also consult a doctor if the sensations are accompanied by other symptoms, such as: pain during intercourse or from inserting a tampon, pain during urination, blood in the urine, unusual vaginal discharge, pain in the pelvic region, unusual bleeding from the vagina. The symptoms above could point to an underlying condition, such as: a vaginal yeast infection, a urinary tract infection, a sexually transmitted infection, or STI. While it is not clear that these conditions cause vibrating sensations in the vagina, they may cause vaginal irritation. Infections may require treatment with antifungal or antibiotic medications. It is also a good idea to see a doctor if the vibrating sensations occur during pregnancy. The doctor may want to perform an examination, particularly if the sensations are a new or persistent issue. Unless an underlying condition exists, there are no formal treatments for a vibrating vagina. Instead, a person can take steps to help reduce the frequency of the sensation. These steps may include: eating a balanced diet, drinking plenty of fluids, trying to relax when the sensations occur, practicing stress reduction techniques, such as meditation and yoga, practicing Kegel exercises, which strengthen the pelvic floor muscles, getting enough rest each night. The tips above may not always be effective. A doctor will then need to determine whether an underlying medical condition is causing the sensations. The doctor will ask about any additional symptoms and take a medical history. They may also perform a pelvic examination. If the sensations have an underlying medical cause, the doctor will recommend a course of treatment. Muscle spasms can occur for many reasons. Some of the more benign causes include: certain medications, with the spasms as a side effect, overuse from excessive exercise or activity, dehydration. Also, several medical conditions can cause muscle spasms anywhere in the body. Among them are: malnutrition, head injuries, epilepsy, Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, or MS. If anyone suspects that a vibrating sensation in their vagina stems from an underlying health problem, they should see a doctor. In such cases, spasms may also occur elsewhere or be accompanied by other symptoms. It is also a good idea to see a doctor if any unusual vaginal sensations could be a side effect of medication. A vibrating sensation in the vagina is typically no cause for concern. The cause is often a muscle spasm affecting the pelvic floor muscles. Usually, the sensations are sporadic and do not cause significant disruption to a person’s daily activities. However, see a doctor if the sensations are painful, if they become more frequent or intense, or if they accompany other symptoms.