The chances of transmitting HIV through oral sex are very low. It is also possible to take further preventive measures, such as using a condom. HIV is a virus that spreads through bodily fluids. A person can contract HIV through direct contact with infected fluids or sharing syringes with someone who has the virus. In this article, we discuss whether it is possible to transmit HIV through oral sex and provide some tips for prevention. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), there is little to no risk of getting HIV from oral sex. However, it can potentially happen if someone with HIV ejaculates into the mouth of their sexual partner. Only someone with a detectable viral load can transmit HIV through oral sex. A viral load refers to the amount of the virus that is present in the blood. Antiretroviral medications reduce the number of viral cells in the body, which can cause an undetectable viral load. The risk of a person with an undetectable viral load transmitting HIV through any sexual activity is effectively zero. The CDC state that it is impossible to transmit HIV through: saliva, air, water, sweat, tears, closed mouth kissing, insects, pets, sharing toilets, sharing food or drink. A person with HIV can only transmit the virus to another person through the following bodily fluids: blood, semen, pre-seminal fluid, rectal fluids, vaginal fluids, breast milk. These fluids can enter the body through damaged tissue or mucous membranes, or by injection using shared needles or syringes. An individual can contract HIV once these fluids enter the bloodstream. Parts of the body with mucous membranes include the: rectum, vagina, penis, mouth. It is also possible to transmit HIV through sores or bleeding gums during open mouthed kissing. If sores or bleeding gums are not present, it is safe to kiss. The most common way of transmitting HIV is through anal sex. Fellatio, or mouth-to-penis sex, is the type of oral sex most likely to result in the transmission of HIV. For example, transmission is possible if someone with HIV ejaculates in the mouth of their sexual partner. The risk is higher if their partner has bleeding gums or any sores or cuts around the mouth. However, this risk is still substantially lower than the risk of passing on the virus through anal or vaginal sex. During cunnilingus, or oral vaginal sex, there is a chance that HIV can enter the bloodstream from vaginal fluids in the mouth. The risk is higher if there are cuts, sores, or bleeding gums in the person’s mouth. The risk of transmitting HIV to others is highest during the early stages of the infection. Some factors that increase the risk of transmission include: sores or cuts in the mouth, sores in or around the vagina or penis, bleeding gums or gum disease, contact with menstrual blood, the presence of sexually transmitted infections (STIs), throat infections, damage to the throat or mouth lining. Although the risk of transmitting HIV through oral sex is low, people can take some precautions to lower the risk even further. For example, people with HIV can avoid ejaculating in the mouth of their sexual partner. They can do this by using a condom or withdrawing the penis before ejaculation. A dental dam is another option. Dental dams are small latex or silicone squares for placing over the vagina, anus, or mouth during sex. Flossing or brushing the teeth can increase the risk of bleeding gums, so it can help to avoid doing this right before sexual activity. People without HIV can take additional steps to avoid transmission, including: taking pre-exposure prophylaxis medications before coming into contact with someone who has HIV , taking post-exposure prophylaxis within a couple of days after contact with someone who has HIV, using condoms or dental dams correctly during all sexual activities , avoiding lubricants with an oil base, such as Vaseline or baby oil, reducing the number of sexual partners, getting regular sexual health checkups. People with HIV should take their antiretroviral medication exactly as their doctor prescribes it. In the early stages of HIV, people can experience symptoms that include: fever, chills, night sweats, fatigue, rashes that are not itchy, aching muscles, a sore throat, swollen glands or lymph nodes, sores or ulcers in the mouth. These symptoms can last for a few days or several weeks. Some people experience no symptoms at all during the early stages of HIV. If someone suspects that they have come into contact with HIV in the last 72 hours, they should take an HIV test immediately. A doctor, community health center, or hospital can provide this test. A doctor may prescribe post-exposure prophylaxis. Post-exposure prophylaxis is a medication that can prevent HIV. These medications are not 100% effective in stopping HIV, but taking them as soon as possible will reduce the risk. It might be necessary to take the medication once or twice a day for 28 days. Tests for HIV include the following: Nucleic acid test: This test uses a blood sample to detect HIV 10–33 days after exposure to the virus. Antigen and antibody combination test: Using blood samples, this test can detect HIV 18–45 days after exposure to the virus. Antibody test: Using blood from a finger prick, this test detects HIV 23–90 days after exposure. . The risk of transmitting HIV through oral sex is very low. Ejaculating into a partner’s mouth increases the risk. Using condoms and other barrier methods can help prevent the spread of HIV through oral sex. Anyone who suspects that they have come into contact with the virus recently should take an HIV test right away.