No one knows for sure how many people have herpes because it is common to experience only mild symptoms or no symptoms at all. There are two types of herpes virus: herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) and HSV-2. Experts estimate that a large portion of the world’s population has oral herpes, or HSV-1, while a smaller portion has HSV-2, or genital herpes. Herpes is a skin condition that comes from the herpes simplex virus. Herpes may cause skin blisters, sores, fever, and body aches. Often, however, it causes no symptoms. Both types of virus are contagious, and there is no cure. Keep reading to learn more about how many people have herpes. We also discuss the common myths surrounding this infection. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), more than 1 in 6 people in the United States between the ages of 14 and 49 years have genital herpes. The World Health Organization (WHO) say that globally, about 67% of people below the age of 50 years — which equates to 3. 7 billion people — have HSV-1, the virus that most often causes oral herpes. They also note that about 417 million people aged 15–49 years — 11% of the population — have HSV-2, which usually causes genital herpes. According to the WHO, HSV-2 is more common in women, with the infection affecting 267 million women and 150 million men in 2012. This difference is due to the fact that women catch HSV-2 more easily from sexual contact. Although herpes is common, many myths and misunderstandings surround it. Here are some of the most common ones:Fact: Most people who have oral or genital herpes do not have any symptoms, according to the WHO. Therefore, a person may not know that they have herpes, which means that they could unintentionally spread it to others. The WHO state that only 10–20% of people who have HSV-2 report receiving a diagnosis of genital herpes. Fact: Not all cases of herpes spread through sex. HSV-1 often spreads through contact with the skin or saliva of a person with the infection. For instance, people can spread it by kissing, sharing utensils, touching an infected surface, or having skin-to-skin contact. Most people who have HSV-1, which can cause cold sores, got it during childhood from nonsexual contact, such as receiving a kiss from a family member, according to the CDC. HSV-2, however, is “ almost exclusively sexually transmitted, ” according to the WHO. Fact: People can spread herpes to others at any time, including when they do not have any symptoms. People with a herpes infection may experience outbreaks and remissions. During an outbreak, a person has active sores or blisters, but in remission, they may have no symptoms. A person is usually more contagious during an outbreak, but the virus can also spread when the infection is in remission. Fact: There is no cure for HSV-1 or HSV-2. Once a person has it, the infection is lifelong. Symptoms may come and go, but the virus stays in the body. However, a doctor may prescribe antiviral medications that can help control the severity and frequency of outbreaks. Fact: Most of the time, a herpes infection is mild. However, herpes can cause serious complications in some cases. Having HSV-2 can make a person three times more likely to get an HIV infection. If a baby is exposed to herpes during delivery, they are at risk of getting neonatal herpes, which can cause brain damage or death. Research shows that neonatal herpes affects 1 in 1,700 to 1 in 8,200 births. Both types of herpes are most contagious when a person has symptoms. However, herpes can still spread when no symptoms are present. Genital herpes spreads through sexual contact. The likelihood of a person spreading it will depend on: how often the person has sex with another person, whether and how often the person uses condoms or dental dams, how long the person has had a herpes infection. Using condoms reduces the risk of spreading herpes to a partner but cannot prevent it completely. Dental dams can also reduce the risk during oral sex, as herpes can spread between a person’s mouth and their partner’s genitals. Research shows that older herpes infections are less contagious than newer ones. In other words, if a person has had the virus for many years, they may be less likely to spread it than someone who recently got the infection. People can also get oral herpes through nonsexual contact with an infected person. This contact may include kissing or sharing utensils or drinks. Oral herpes can also spread to a partner’s genitals during oral sex. Although herpes is contagious, there are ways to lower the risk of spreading it. People who have an active cold sore should avoid oral contact with others. Oral contact includes kissing, sharing objects such as cups or utensils, and oral sex. If a person touches a cold sore, they should wash their hands afterward. People who have genital herpes should avoid sexual contact during an outbreak (when there are visible sores or other symptoms). People who have genital herpes but do not have symptoms should use barrier protection during sexual contact. These barriers reduce the risk of spreading the infection, but they do not eliminate the risk completely. Antiviral medications can reduce the risk of spreading herpes, in addition to lowering the frequency of outbreaks. Research findings suggest that they can reduce the risk by about half. People who have HSV-1 or HSV-2 may wish to speak with a doctor about antiviral medication. Women who are pregnant should speak with a healthcare professional about preventing genital herpes. Getting a genital herpes infection in late pregnancy may increase the risk of passing herpes to the baby. . Herpes is a common viral infection that usually causes mild symptoms. People can spread both types of the virus through oral or sexual contact. According to estimates, more than half of the global population has herpes. People who have herpes can still have sexual relationships and continue to kiss and hug family members. However, it is advisable to take precautions during an active outbreak.