Human thumbs are opposable, which allows people to grip objects and perform fine motor movements. Sometimes, a person may experience pain or a lack of movement in the thumb. These symptoms could indicate several underlying health conditions, ranging from systemic diseases, such as arthritis, to sprains and other injuries. In this article, we discuss what causes thumb pain, how to treat it, and when to see a doctor. There are numerous possible causes of thumb pain. We outline some examples below. A thumb sprain results from stretching or damage to the ligaments of the thumb. A ligament is a band of tough, fibrous tissue that connects bone to bone. According to the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, sprains most commonly occur when a person falls onto an outstretched hand. A person with a sprained thumb will experience pain, swelling, and bruising along the inside of the thumb, near the first knuckle. Minor injuries where the ligament has not torn may heal with basic home care. Following the principles of RICE may help. Rest: Support the thumb and rest it for as long as possible. Ice: Apply an ice pack wrapped in a cloth for about 10 minutes every hour for the first day. Compress: Wear an elastic (ACE) bandage to reduce swelling. Elevate: Keep the hand raised above heart level to reduce swelling and pain. . If the thumb ligament has a partial tear, a person will need to wear a temporary cast to immobilize the thumb. After around 4 weeks, the person can usually remove the cast and begin exercises to help regain movement in the thumb. If the injury has caused a complete tear to the thumb ligament, a person will need surgery to repair it. In some cases, a bone within the thumb may be broken or fractured. These injuries can cause intense pain that starts at the site of the damaged bone and radiates through the wrist and forearm. Depending on the type of fracture or break and its location, the thumb may also become unstable. It may move loosely from side to side. If the bone fragments remain close to the break, a temporary cast may be enough to hold the fragments in place. A person may need to wear the cast for 4–6 weeks. During this time, a person may require regular X-rays to check that the bones remain properly aligned. If the bone fragments have drifted far from the break, a person may require surgery to realign the fragments. A surgeon may use wire, pins, or screws to hold the fragments together while the bone heals. Following surgery, a person will need to wear a cast for 2–6 weeks to immobilize the thumb. They may then need to perform exercises to help regain movement of the thumb. Cartilage is a type of tissue that cushions and lubricates the joints. It allows bones within the joint to move across each other without friction. Basal joint arthritis (BJA), or thumb arthritis, occurs when the cartilage between the base of the thumb and the wrist wears away. This can happen for several reasons, including: osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, injury to the thumb. BJA may cause the following symptoms: pain, stiffness, or swelling of the thumb joint, red or tender skin near the thumb joint, decreased range of motion in the thumb, symptoms that worsen when moving the thumb. Arthritis is a progressive disease, meaning it will worsen over time. Treatments for arthritis aim to slow the progression of the disease and manage its symptoms. Over-the-counter (OTC) pain medications are usually the first-line treatment for BJA. Some additional treatment options include: doing thumb exercises, wearing a splint to stabilize the thumb joint, having injections of corticosteroid or hyaluronic acid into the thumb joint, undergoing surgery to fuse, reposition, or remove a joint that does not respond to the above treatments. According to the Journal of the American Academy of Physician Assistants (JAAPA), stenosing flexor tenosynovitis, or trigger finger, is one of the most common causes of hand pain. It occurs due to inflammation in the outer part, or sheath, of a tendon within the thumb or finger. A tendon is a band of fibrous tissue that connects muscle to bone. In trigger finger, inflammation of the tendon sheath causes the thumb or finger to catch or lock in a bent position. The condition may occur as a result of repetitive use or injury. Some symptoms of trigger finger affecting the thumb include: pain and stiffness at the base of the thumb, a sore nodule near the base of the thumb, difficulty straightening the thumb, a clicking or popping sensation when bending or straightening the thumb. The treatment for trigger finger depends on the severity and duration of symptoms. Sometimes, the condition improves without treatment. However, taking a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID) drug such as ibuprofen can help to alleviate pain and inflammation. Some treatment options for severe or persistent trigger finger include: wearing a splint to prevent movement of the affected thumb, having corticosteroid injections into the tendon sheath of the affected thumb, undergoing surgery to free up movement of the affected thumb. De Quervain’s tenosynovitis (DQT) is similar to trigger finger. However, DQT involves inflammation of the tendons, whereas trigger finger involves inflammation of the tendon sheath. DQT causes pain on the thumb side of the wrist. Other symptoms may include: pain or tenderness at the base of the thumb and the wrist, swelling on the side of the wrist closest to the thumb, pain that radiates through the forearm, difficulty making a fist , difficulty grasping objects. Experts do not know the exact cause of DQT. However, repetitive motions or injury can lead to inflammation around the tendons of the wrist. This inflammation then restricts movement of the tendons. DQT is most common among women between 30 and 50 years of age. The treatment options for DQT are the same as those for trigger finger. The carpal tunnel is a narrow tube of bones and ligaments that sits inside the wrist. A large nerve called the median nerve runs through the carpal tunnel and into the palm. It provides sensation to the thumb, index, middle, and ring fingers. Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) occurs when inflammation of the wrist compresses the median nerve. This can cause a burning or tingling sensation in the thumb and first three fingers. Other symptoms may include: decreased grip strength, difficulty performing fine motor movements, numbness , pain that radiates up the arm. Some potential causes of CTS include: repetitive hand motions, wrist sprains or fractures , rheumatoid arthritis , cysts or tumors in the wrist , diabetes or other metabolic disorders , underactive thyroid gland, overactive pituitary gland. People who experience mild or intermittent symptoms of CTS may benefit from the following treatments: resting the affected hand, wearing a splint at night, applying cool packs to reduce swelling and discomfort, taking NSAIDs such as ibuprofen to reduce pain and swelling, practicing yoga exercises to help reduce pain and improve grip strength , having corticosteroid injections to alleviate pressure on the median nerve. People who experience more severe symptoms of CTS may require surgery to sever the affected ligament. This will reduce pressure on the median nerve, thereby helping to alleviate pain. However, people who have this procedure may experience continued numbness or weakness in the hand. Certain joints within the body contain synovial fluid, which helps to lubricate the joint. A ganglion cyst is a collection of synovial fluid. These cysts commonly form near the joints in the hands, wrists, knees, and feet. A ganglion cyst that develops on or near the thumb can cause a visible lump under the skin. It may also cause pain and discomfort when moving the joint. Injury and overuse are common causes of ganglion cysts. Ganglion cysts sometimes disappear without treatment. Persistent ganglion cysts usually only require treatment if they cause pain or a loss of movement in the affected joint. Some potential treatment options for a ganglion cyst include: wearing a brace to immobilize the wrist and help shrink the cyst, draining the cyst using a needle and syringe, having surgery to remove the cyst. Some general self-care tips for thumb pain include: avoiding repetitive hand activities , wearing a splint or brace to immobilize the thumb , applying an ice pack to reduce inflammation , avoiding wearing jewelry or gloves that constrict the thumb . People should see a doctor if their thumb pain is persistent, or severe, or impacts their ability to perform daily tasks and activities. People should seek immediate medical attention if they believe they may have dislocated or fractured their thumb. Some signs to look out for include: inability to move the thumb, swelling or warmth in or around the thumb , a thumb that appears crooked or feels unstable. To diagnose the underlying cause of thumb pain, a doctor will conduct a physical examination. He or she may also ask if a person recently injured their thumb or hand. If the cause of the pain is unclear, the doctor may order imaging tests, such as an X-ray, MRI, or ultrasound. Thumb pain can occur as a result of repetitive movements, injury, and systemic inflammatory diseases. Thumb pain itself does not present a significant health risk. However, it may be a sign of a more serious condition, such as a broken bone or arthritis. People can treat thumb pain at home by resting the thumb, applying ice packs, and taking OTC painkillers. People should seek medical care if their thumb pain is persistent, severe, or significantly interferes with their ability to perform daily activities.