Farting is a natural process and often occurs without help, but sometimes a buildup of gas in the body can cause pain and bloating. In these cases, it may help to use one or more poses or other techniques to help the body fart. Certain foods or eating too quickly can be the cause of gas, but tightness in the abdominal muscles may also be partially to blame. Some yoga poses and other relaxing positions may help release gas that has built up or relieve cramps and bloating caused by the buildup. Most of these yoga poses, also called asanas, are best done alone and in a comfortable setting. They can be practiced anywhere if needed, but relaxation is key to being able to pass gas, so it is essential for a person to feel comfortable in their surroundings. The following poses may help a person pass gas:In addition to these positions, rubbing the abdomen in a clockwise motion may help get rid of trapped gas and reduce cramps and bloating. Some foods and drinks may also help a person pass gas. While these may not be a good idea if a person already has excessive bloating and pain, they may help someone release gas more easily. Foods and drinks that may help a person fart include: carbonated beverages and sparkling mineral water, chewing gum, dairy products, fatty or fried foods, fiber-rich fruits, some artificial sweeteners, such as sorbitol and xylitol. Farting is the way the body releases swallowed air and other trapped gasses. The positions listed above may help relieve gas temporarily, but many people also look for ways to reduce the need to pass gas. While it may be impossible to make farts disappear completely, there are some ways to reduce the number of times a person has to pass gas each day. Many foods increase the amount of gas that results from the digestion of food. Beans are well-known culprits, but these pulses contain many nutrients so should still be included in a healthful diet. Soaking beans before cooking them may help reduce flatulence in some people, while others may want to limit the quantity of beans they eat. Cutting down on other foods that cause gas may help as well. This includes foods high in sulfur or certain fermentable carbs and fibers, such as: cauliflower, cabbage, broccoli, kale, Brussels sprouts, artichokes, asparagus, apples, pears, peaches, beer, carbonated drinks. Dairy foods, including cheese and ice cream, may also cause gas, especially for people who are sensitive to lactose. Another important tip is to chew all food slowly and with a closed mouth. A lot of trapped gas is swallowed air, which is more likely to happen if a person eats quickly or with their mouth open. While it is not always best to hold in a fart, sometimes it is necessary. Whether in a crowded room or on a first date, there are plenty of reasons to hold in potentially embarrassing gas until it can be let out discreetly. Clenching the anus may help in the short term, and changing positions until the gas shifts in the body may also help. The best solution is for a person to take a moment to relieve the gas in a bathroom or away from other people. This way it will not build up and lead to uncomfortable bloating or pain. Farting may be socially unacceptable in some places, but it is a natural bodily function. It may help to hold a fart in until someone is alone, but it is healthy to pass the gas when the right time comes. For people having difficulty farting or dealing with gas pains, using certain positions, chewing gum, or drinking carbonated water may help release built-up gas and reduce bloating.