In the majority of cases, doctors do not know what caused an individual to develop CJD (Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease). Although several factors may be linked to some extent to CJD risk, none have been specifically and compellingly identified. The following risk factors appear to be linked to different kinds of CJD to some extent: Age – if someone develops Sporadic CJD, they will do so when they are about 60 years old. Familial CJD symptoms usually start at a younger age. Some individuals, though, can get vCJD (variant CJD) much earlier in life. Your genes – familial CJD occurs among people who have a genetic mutation that causes the disease to develop. A susceptible individual only needs to inherit one copy of the faulty gene (from mother or father) to have a higher risk of developing familial CJD. Those who have the faulty gene have a 50-50 chance of having children with the mutated gene. What Is Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD)? What Is Mad Cow Disease?What Are The Signs And Symptoms Of Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CDJ)? What Are The Complications Of CJD?What Are The Causes Of Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD)?What Are The Risk Factors Of Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD)?How Is Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) Transmitted? Can CJD Be Transmitted From Person To Person?How Is Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) Diagnosed? Diagnosing Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD)What Are The Treatment Options For Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD)? Prevention Of CJDContaminated beef – individuals who consume contaminated beef are believed to have a higher risk of developing an acquired form of CJD, called vCJD. This risk has not been compellingly proved. However, there is a strong similarity between BSE-causing prions and vCJD. Several cases of the disease have occurred in Europe among younger-than-average patients after a BSE outbreak. Iatrogenic CJD (iCJD) – rarely, this is acquired after a medical procedure or treatment, such as an organ/tissue transplant, graft, hGH (human growth hormone) therapy, in which the CNS (central nervous system) is exposed to prion-contaminated medical instruments or tissue. . A risk factor is something which raises the probability of developing a condition or disease. For example, being very overweight or obese significantly raises the risk of developing diabetes type 2. Thus, obesity/overweight is a risk factor for diabetes type 2. Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease is not contagious. However, there is a risk of transmission if one is in contact with spinal cord fluid, tissue or the blood of individuals with the disease. Anyone suspected or confirmed to have CJD, as well as those with a family history of the disease should not donate organs, tissue or blood. Written by Christian Nordqvist