So far, no generally accepted treatment exists for CJD (Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease) or any of its variants. It is a disease that consistently leads to death. Research is currently underway to see how effective antibiotics, antiviral agents and steroids might be. However, no benefits have yet been demonstrated. A teenager from Northern Ireland was given pentosan polysulphate (PPS), a medication used to treat interstitial cystitis. The PPS is infused into the individual’s lateral ventricle within the brain. PPS appears to slow down CJD’s progression, but it does not stop the progress. Eventually seven patients in one study were found to survive for longer when given PPS treatment. However, the CJD Therapy Advisory Group to the UK Health Department says data so far regarding PPS is not compelling and further studies are required. A 2007 study involving 26 patients found no proof of efficacy. Other therapies, such as RNA interference, amphotericin B and doxorubicin have so far produced no effective results. All doctors can do at the moment is to alleviate some of the symptoms so that the patient can be as comfortable as possible. Sedatives and antidepressants may help with anxiety and depression. Doctors may prescribe clonazepam and sodium valporate for tremors and muscle jerks. Opiate-based painkillers may be used to treat pain. During the later stages of CJD, changing the patient’s position frequently can help keep them comfortable and prevent bed sores. Drugs may be needed to control aggressive behavior. As CJD develops, the patient will require more nursing care and practical support. They will not be able to wash, feed, move around and go to the toilet on their own. Urinary catheters may be required. A feeding tube may be recommended if the individual finds it hard to swallow. Depending on the severity and progression of the disease, some patients may be treated at home. Family members may need help in coping with the changes needed for home care. In countries with free universal health care, such as the UK, a patient diagnosed with CJD is referred to the National CJD Surveillance Unit and the National Health Service (NHS) National Prion Clinic for diagnosis and care. The individual will be assigned a specialist doctor and nurse who will liaise with local services, such as GPs (general practitioners, primary care physicians), physical therapists (UK: physiotherapists), social workers, and occupational therapists. Specialist teams may also help with clinical and emotional support for both the patient, family and caregivers. However, caring for a CJD patient at home can be extremely stressful, upsetting and distressing. A considerable number of patients and family members prefer to use the services of hospices or hospitals. Depending on what services are available in a country, an individual with CJD may receive help from visiting nurses or aides, homemakers, adult protective services, volunteer services and other community resources. Behavior modification may help control dangerous or unacceptable behaviors. The patient may receive legal advice early on during the disease to form advanced directives, power of attorney, and other legal issues which make it easier to make ethical decisions for the patient with CJD later on. Written by Christian Nordqvist