Lots of people have under eye wrinkles. They are a natural part of the aging process and are harmless. As people get older, the skin loses its ability to renew itself. The skin in the area under the eyes is particularly susceptible to the aging process because it is thin. As a result, it is common to develop wrinkles under the eyes over time. In this article, we explain how wrinkles form, look at the causes of different types of under eye wrinkles, and outline several home remedies and medical treatments. People may have one or more types of wrinkles under their eyes, each of which occurs due to a different cause. Over time, the repeated contraction of muscles underneath the skin can cause dynamic wrinkles. These tend to show up when the muscles are in use — for example, when someone smiles. Dynamic wrinkles typically develop between the eyebrows and on the forehead. Crow’s feet, which are wrinkles near the outer corners of the eyes, are also an example of dynamic wrinkles. Skin damage causes static wrinkles, which remain visible even when the facial muscles are at rest. Over time, dynamic wrinkles can become static wrinkles. Exposure to the sun, smoking, and poor nutrition can all contribute to static wrinkles. The age-related sagging of facial structures causes wrinkle folds. These usually develop in the grooves between the nose and mouth, but they may also occur underneath the eyes. Lots of people turn to home remedies to improve the appearance of wrinkles underneath the eyes. Various home remedies, such as placing slices of cucumber on the eyes or applying banana face masks, have been popular for many years, but there is little scientific evidence to confirm that these methods work. However, research does suggest that polyphenols, a chemical compound in foods such as green tea and pomegranates, can help prevent wrinkles. In addition, an earlier study found that using a vitamin C cream might reduce the appearance of wrinkles. Hundreds of anti-aging products and eye creams are on sale in drug and grocery stores, but the evidence supporting their effectiveness varies. The American Society for Dermatologic Surgery warn people to be wary of buying any product that promises miraculous results. The American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) advise people looking for anti-aging skin care products to: use moisturizers to help minimize fine lines around the eyes, look for a product that the manufacturers have designed specifically to treat wrinkles, avoid using more than one anti-aging product within a few days or weeks, use products that suit their skin type, look for products that are hypoallergenic and either noncomedogenic or nonacnegenic. Ingredients to look out for on the labels of anti-aging products include: broad spectrum SPF sunscreen, retinol, antioxidants, alpha hydroxy acids, argan oil. The AAD advise people to have realistic expectations of anti-aging skin care products, noting that these tend to provide only modest results. Numerous cosmetic and medical treatments for wrinkles are available. These tend to be more effective than home remedies and beauty products, but they also have more possible side effects. Common procedures include:During facial rejuvenation, a trained healthcare professional will inject a substance called botulinum toxin, or Botox, into the skin. People tend to use it to treat dynamic wrinkles, such as crow’s feet. It works by stopping the muscles underneath the wrinkles from moving. Improvements tend to last for 3–4 months. The possible side effects include long-term muscle paralysis, Bell’s palsy, and permanent eye damage. Doctors may refer to fillers as soft tissue fillers or dermal fillers. People use them to restore fullness to hollow areas, such as those that sometimes develop under the eyes. During the procedure, a trained healthcare professional will inject collagen or hyaluronic acid into the skin underneath the eye. The results are usually immediate. The possible side effects include bruising, bleeding, and infection, and some people may have an allergic reaction to the filler. In rare cases, fillers may lead to vascular occlusion, which can cause tissue death. Wrinkles are an inevitable part of aging, but people can take steps to prevent them. These include: wearing sunscreen with a minimum SPF of 30 every day, avoiding getting a tan, moisturizing every day, stopping smoking, if relevant, eating a healthful, balanced diet. Lots of people have wrinkles underneath their eyes. As the skin ages, it loses the ability to renew itself, and wrinkles develop. The three main types of wrinkles are dynamic wrinkles, static wrinkles, and wrinkle folds. They are nothing to worry about, but some people do not like the way that they look. There is not much evidence to support natural anti-wrinkle remedies, but there are many anti-aging creams and lotions on the market. It is important to remember that these can only provide modest improvements at best. Some people choose cosmetic procedures to treat their wrinkles. These are more effective than beauty products but can sometimes cause side effects. There are lots of things that people can do to try to prevent wrinkles from developing under their eyes. These include avoiding exposure to the sun, not smoking, and moisturizing the skin every day.