Some people like their pubic hair to look or feel well-groomed. Some others prefer to remove it all. This article looks at the various ways to remove pubic hair safely at home. It also describes some professional techniques that may be more effective and provide lasting results. There are a variety of popular ways to trim or remove pubic hair at home. Each method carries some risk, but most are generally safe. A person could try:Using scissors can be a safe way to achieve a groomed look. Because the scissors do not make contact with the skin, the risk of injury is relatively low. Make sure that the scissors are clean and sharp, which will help ensure that they do not tug on the hairs as they cut. To lower the risk of injury, try sitting down while grooming. Also, good lighting is important, and a handheld mirror can help with trimming hard-to-see areas. Because the hair will grow back, regular trimming is necessary to maintain a well-groomed look. Shaving is a popular option for removing pubic hair, and it is generally painless. Still, because the razor makes direct contact with the skin to remove the hair at its base, shaving can cause temporary irritation, redness, or itchiness. To reduce this risk, try: soaking in a warm bath or taking a shower before shaving, using a shaving cream or lotion, using a sharp razor with multiple blades. Also, keep in mind that the pubic skin is thin, and it can be easy to cut or nick this area when shaving. It is a good idea to go slowly. Some people prefer using over-the-counter waxing strips or kits. Waxing pulls hairs from the follicles, removing multiple hairs at once. This typically causes pain, and it can also cause irritation and infection in the sensitive skin of the pubic region. While waxing is more painful than trimming or shaving, the results last longer. A person can also have their pubic hair waxed professionally. Hair removal creams, also called depilatory creams, contain chemicals that break down hair proteins, weakening the base of the hair. This allows a person to wipe away unwanted hair as they wipe away the cream. Hair removal creams are available over the counter. As with waxing, the results often last longer than shaving or trimming. Unlike waxing, hair removal creams generally do not cause pain. However, some people are allergic to the chemicals involved. It is crucial to test the cream on a small area of skin on the arm or leg before applying the product extensively. If a reaction develops, do not use the product. Tweezing is a simple way to remove small amounts of hair. Like waxing, tweezing pulls the hair out of the follicle, resulting in a sharp, pinching sensation. However, tweezing is not as painful as waxing, as it involves removing only one hair at a time. Tweezing may be a good method for touch-ups, but it is not an efficient way to remove hair from larger areas. Some people prefer to see a professional. They offer various methods of hair removal, including: Professional waxing produces similar results to at-home waxing. However, a professional may be less likely to miss areas that a person may miss when using the technique at home. Electrolysis involves using radio waves to damage hair follicles. This causes hair to fall out, and it also disrupts the growth of new hair. Electrolysis targets one hair follicle at a time. A single session can take 15–60 minutes, and multiple follow-up sessions are necessary. Laser hair removal involves destroying hair follicles with a laser and heat. This slows hair regrowth. A person will need to attend follow-up sessions every 6–8 weeks to prevent the hair from regrowing. There is also no guarantee that laser removal will get rid of all the hair. The risks of hair removal depend partly on the method. The safest technique is trimming the hair with scissors, if they do not come into contact with the skin. Shaving the hair or using a method that removes it from its follicle could result in: small breaks or cuts in the skin, redness or irritation , inflamed hair follicles, or folliculitis, ingrown hairs, itchiness as the hair grows back. If a person uses a technique that involves any topical product, there is the risk of a skin reaction, such as: redness and irritation , swelling, hives. Some people may believe that removing pubic hair increases the risk of contracting a sexually transmitted infection (STI). However, research does not bear this out. For example, a 2019 study in female university students found no association between pubic hair grooming and STI risk. A person can take several steps to reduce the risks of pubic hair removal, including: Using the appropriate tools: Razors and scissors should be clean and sharp. Using good lighting and a mirror: Visibility is key to preventing injury. Patch-testing chemical treatments: Apply any product to a small area of skin on the arm or leg first and check for any reaction. Keeping the area clean: After removing pubic hair, make sure that the area stays clean and check for signs of irritation or infection. , Consulting a professional: A registered dermatologist or another licensed skin care professional is the best bet. . Over-the-counter creams and ointments can help address minor cuts, itchiness, and irritation. However, if symptoms are particularly painful or severe, talk to a doctor as soon as possible because an infection may require prescription medication. Also, cosmetic products, including shaving cream and products to remove hair, can cause allergic reactions, and these can be severe. The medical name for a severe reaction is anaphylaxis, and symptoms of it include: swelling or hives, tightness in the throat, hoarseness, difficulty breathing, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, low blood pressure, a rapid heartbeat, a feeling of doom, dizziness, fainting. Anaphylaxis can be life threatening. Anyone who thinks that they may be experiencing it should call 911 or otherwise seek immediate help. Some people prefer to trim or remove their pubic hair at home, while some others use professional services. Various safety strategies can reduce the risk of injury, infection, or irritation. Over-the-counter creams and ointments can help treat minor issues, but if severe or persistent problems arise, seek medical attention as soon as possible.