Some people believe that masturbation can cause erectile dysfunction, but this is a myth. Masturbation is a common and beneficial activity. While most men have trouble getting or keeping an erection at some point in their lives, frequent difficulties getting an erection is called erectile dysfunction (ED). Learn more about ED and masturbation, if watching porn affects sexual function, and when to see a doctor. No, masturbation cannot cause ED — it is a myth. Masturbation is natural and does not affect the quality or frequency of erections. Research shows that masturbation is very common across all ages. Approximately 74 percent of males reported masturbating, compared to 48. 1 percent of females. Masturbation even has health benefits. According to Planned Parenthood, masturbation can help release tension, reduce stress, and aid sleep. A person may not be able to get an erection soon after masturbating. This is called the male refractory period and is not the same as ED. A male refractory period is the recovery time before a man will be able to get an erection again after ejaculating. Universally, researchers are confident that masturbation does not cause ED. However, difficulty getting and keeping an erection either while masturbating or while having sex may be a sign of other conditions. Age is the most significant predictor of ED. Erectile dysfunction is common in men over 40 years old, with approximately 40 percent being affected to some degree. Rates of complete ED, or the inability to get an erection, increase from 5 percent in men aged 40 to about 15 percent at age 70. Other risk factors for ED include: diabetes, being overweight, heart disease, lower urinary tract symptoms (bladder, prostate, or urethra issues), alcohol and cigarette use. Although ED generally affects older men, a 2013 study found that as many as a quarter of men under 40 years old received a new ED diagnosis. In younger men, ED is more likely to be caused by psychological or emotional factors. Younger men also have higher levels of testosterone in their bodies and are less likely to have other risk factors for ED. Anxiety about sexual performance or erection quality can lead to further stress, sometimes creating a “ vicious circle. ” Factors that can contribute to ED in younger men include: stress, anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, bipolar disorder, or medications for these illnesses, being overweight, insomnia or lack of sleep, urinary tract problems, a spinal cord injury, multiple sclerosis, or spina bifida, having a high-stress job, relationship stress, performance anxiety. There is no evidence to suggest that watching porn causes ED. Internet porn usage rose at the same time that the rate of ED diagnoses increased in men under 40 years old. This led some researchers to believe that porn might affect male viewers’ ability to get and maintain erections. While it is true that internet porn access and diagnoses of ED in younger men increased at about the same time and rate, this does not prove a link between the two. Until recently, there was little research into ED in young men, making numbers difficult to interpret. Also, due to stigmas and reluctance to speak to a doctor about sexual health, ED may be underreported in both younger and older men. It is also difficult to separate the psychological effect of watching porn from other psychological factors, such as performance anxiety. ED is sometimes a sign of underlying conditions, such as heart disease or anxiety. Telling a doctor about ED can prevent potential problems that these conditions might cause, and also provide solutions to ED. For example, doctors may recommend that men with ED who are overweight lose some weight. This is because maintaining a healthy weight can increase testosterone levels, making it easier to get an erection. A doctor may also recommend stress-relief techniques or cognitive behavioral therapy for those dealing with ED due to emotional or psychological issues. Masturbation does not cause ED, but many underlying health problems, including heart disease, urinary tract symptoms, alcohol use, depression, and anxiety, can. Research does not suggest that masturbation using internet porn could cause ED. Some people who watch porn may also experience performance anxiety, resulting in difficulties with erections, but performance anxiety is common without porn use. Anyone experiencing problems getting or maintaining an erection should speak to a doctor, as ED is often treatable.