Medicare covers both traditional and laser cataract surgeries. These policies also include a traditional intraocular lens implant. However, they would not cover the cost of a newer multifocal lens. According to the National Eye Institute, around 50% of adults have a cataract or have undergone cataract surgery by the time they reach 80 years of age. For adults aged 65 years and older, Medicare has simple requirements for cataract surgery: A doctor must deem cataract surgery as medically necessary, and the treating physician has to accept a Medicare plan as payment. Typically, Medicare pays 80% of the expenses related to surgery and does not cover 20% of the costs. Medicare also pays for one pair of glasses after the cataract surgery. This article explains the costs of cataract surgery and which expenses Medicare will and will not cover. It also looks at cataract surgery, what is involved, and when it is necessary. Some researchers have found prices in the range of almost $2,700 for one eye and slightly over $5,200 for two eyes. However, the cost of cataract surgery can vary. For example, it may cost more depending on the type of procedure and whether the surgery takes place in an outpatient surgical center or a hospital. Individual surgeon fees also vary, which may affect the total cost of the procedure. The type of lens implant also changes the price. It is best to discuss the overall charges with the surgeon for the most accurate picture of the eventual cost. Usually, Medicare pays 80% of the total surgical cost, as long as a doctor has deemed it medically necessary. The plan covers the following services: preoperative exams, removal of the cataract, implantation of the lens, postoperative exams, one pair of prescription eyeglasses after the surgery . Medicare Part A covers inpatient hospital stays. People do not usually require an overnight stay after cataract surgery. However, if a hospital stay is necessary due to significant complications, Part A will cover the extra accommodation costs. Medicare Part B covers medically necessary procedures, including cataract surgery. It also covers certain postsurgical costs. Usually, Medicare does not cover prescription eyeglasses. The exception is one pair of glasses or contact lenses after cataract surgery. Since various factors can affect the cost, people should check the annual deductible for Medicare Part B. Medicare does not cover the remaining 20% of the cost of the cataract surgery. Plans may also exclude certain other charges, including deductibles and medications such as eye drops. Also, Medicare may not cover all types of intraocular lens. It does cover monofocal lenses, which a surgeon will typically use during cataract surgery. Although other lenses are available — including multifocal, accommodative, and toric lenses — Medicare may not cover these. Lifestyle factors and daily activities will define the best type of lens for a person with cataracts. For example, accommodative lenses enable the wearer to see distant and near objects, which may eliminate the need for glasses. Medicare supplemental plans are also known as Medigap. These are private insurance policies that help people pay the 20% of costs excluded from Medicare coverage. For instance, supplemental plans may pay deductibles, copayments, and other out-of-pocket expenses. Any person over the age of 65 years with Medicare parts A and B can apply for a supplemental plan. The costs of Medicare supplemental plans vary. Cataracts involve a clouding of the lens in the eye. According to the American Academy of Ophthalmology, aging is the most common cause of cataracts. Normal proteins in the lens start to break down as a person becomes older. Over time, this breakdown causes cloudiness in the lens. This can interfere with vision. Around 25 million people in the United States have cataracts. As of 2015, authorities estimate that about 3. 6 million people in the US. undergo cataract surgery every year. Cataract surgery involves removing the cloudy lens and implanting an artificial lens known as an intraocular lens. There are two main types of cataract surgery: phacoemulsification and laser-assisted surgery. Phacoemulsification is the most common type of cataract surgery. The procedure involves making a small cut in the cornea and inserting an ultrasound probe through the incision. The probe breaks the lens into tiny pieces that the surgeon then removes from the eye using a suction device. During laser-assisted surgery, on the other hand, the surgeon places an ultrasound device over the eye. This maps the eye’s surface, then sends the information to a computer. The computer defines the exact depth and location at which the cut should take place. The surgeon then uses a laser to make the incision. Energy from the laser also helps them soften the cataract. Both procedures involve implanting an intraocular lens. An eye surgeon will help the person decide which type of surgery may be best for their needs. Medicare funds both types of cataract surgery. Cataracts do not often produce symptoms in the early stages. In fact, at first, many people do not realize that they have cataracts. However, cataracts can lead to vision loss without treatment. Going for regular eye exams may help a doctor detect cataracts before symptoms become apparent. It is best to see an eye doctor, or ophthalmologist, upon noticing any cataract symptoms. Cataracts are treatable, and surgery is usually successful. A person should see their doctor if they notice any of the following symptoms: blurred or cloudy vision, double vision , difficulty seeing at night , seeing a halo around lights , colors appearing similar , needing more light to read . Although some symptoms may indicate other eye problems, a person can visit an eye doctor to rule out cataracts. Cataracts are some of the most common eye conditions to affect older adults. However, cataract surgery is usually successful. Medicare pays for cataract surgery as long as the doctor agrees that it is medically necessary. The cost of cataract surgery may vary. Medicare usually covers 80% of the surgical costs. People may wish to use supplemental plans, such as Medigap, to pay the remaining 20%. For information about funding cataract surgery, it is best to speak to the insurance provider directly.