Tomatoes are relatively low in total carbohydrates, and they contain many vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants. As tomatoes do not contain much carbohydrate, people following a low carb diet can eat them in moderation. In this article, we look at the nutritional information for tomatoes and list other low carb fruits and vegetables that a person can include in their diet. The number of carbs in tomatoes can vary depending on the particular type of tomato or tomato product. According to the Department of Agriculture (USDA), the carb counts of some common tomato varieties are: one grape tomato — 0. 307 grams (g), one cherry tomato — 0. 661 g, one Italian or plum tomato — 2. 410 g, one medium tomato (about 123 g) — 4. 780 g, 1 cup chopped or sliced tomatoes (about 180 g) — 7. 000 g, 1 cup cherry tomatoes (about 149 g) — 5. 800 g. Tomatoes offer a variety of nutrients, including: vitamin C, potassium, calcium, vitamin A, phosphorus, folate. In addition, tomatoes contain a large number of antioxidants, such as: lycopene , beta carotene , lutein, flavonoids, phenolic acids, tannins. People following a low carb diet should check the label of the tomato product for the total carbs and any added sugar. People looking to limit their intake of vegetables that are higher in carbs should avoid starchy fruits and vegetables, such as potatoes, corn, and sweet potatoes. According to the American Diabetes Association (ADA), some low starch vegetables that a person can choose from include: green beans, green cabbage, sugar snap peas, radishes, artichoke, peppers, broccoli, baby corn, onions, mushrooms, celery, okra, squash, asparagus , cauliflower, bamboo shoots, beets, carrots, bean sprouts, turnips, eggplant, Brussels sprouts, kale , turnip greens, collard greens, rutabaga, salad greens, such as lettuce, spinach, and arugula, leeks. People should keep in mind that most vegetables will have at least some carbohydrates in them. People who count carbs can learn about the total carbs in the vegetables they are eating. Nonstarchy fruits and vegetables, including tomatoes, are a good place to start. People can choose fresh, frozen, or canned vegetables. However, they should avoid overly processed vegetables or those with added salt. Fruit is a vital part of a healthful diet. However, for people counting carbs, fruits may present a problem due to their high sugar content. According to the ADA, a person counting carbs can expect to eat about 15 g of carbohydrates in a small whole fruit or about half a cup of canned or frozen fruit. The Diabetes Research Institute Foundation recommend that people living with diabetes eat fruits that are low on the glycemic index. These foods will not cause a large spike in blood sugar levels, and they are usually lower in sugar or carbs. Some of their recommendations include: cantaloupe, pears, apples, raspberries, blackberries, strawberries. Regardless of the type of fruit that a person chooses to eat on a low carb diet, they should stick to fresh or frozen varieties with no added sugar. Dried fruits and canned fruits often contain added sugar. Tomatoes are a fruit that contains minimal carbs and plenty of nutrients. For people following a low carb diet, tomatoes can be a good choice. It is important to note, however, that the variety and size of the tomato will change the number of carbs that it contains.