Headache and fever are common symptoms of a variety of medical conditions. Sometimes people may experience a headache and a fever together. Sometimes, having a headache and a fever at the same time can be serious, so people experiencing both may wish to consult a doctor for a diagnosis. Some people may also have concerns about whether they have contracted SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, as both of these symptoms have an association with COVID-19. However, several other conditions can cause a headache and fever together. Keep reading to learn more about the different causes and treatments for headache and fever, including some prevention tips. Stay informed with live updates on the current COVID-19 outbreak and visit our coronavirus hub for more advice on prevention and treatment. The following are some potential causes of a fever and headache:Meningitis is a bacterial or viral infection that causes inflammation of the meninges, which are membranes that surround the brain. If the meninges become inflamed, a person can develop a headache. Meningitis can be life-threatening. Other symptoms of meningitis often include: a fever, a headache, neck pain or stiffness, light-sensitivity , dizziness, confusion, nausea and vomiting. The seasonal flu occurs between October and March in the Northern Hemisphere and between April and August in the Southern Hemisphere. Influenza viruses travel from person to person through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, and talking. When a person catches the flu, they may experience the following symptoms: a fever, a headache, a cough, a sore throat, muscle aches and pains, a runny nose, congested eyes, light sensitivity, shortness of breath. Sinus infections are one of the most common infections treated in doctor’s offices. People with acute sinusitis typically experience a sudden or gradual onset of symptoms lasting less than 4 weeks. People with chronic sinusitis may experience symptoms for 3 or more months. The symptoms of sinus infections include: a headache, a fever, facial pain and pressure, nasal congestion, excessive fatigue, bad breath, dental pain, a cough. When the fluid within the middle ear becomes infected, a person may develop an ear infection. Ear infections are the second most common reason that children visit the pediatrician. Most ear infections occur in children between 6 and 24 months. Bacteria or viruses can cause ear infections. Pain is one of the most common symptoms, but some babies and young children may experience non-specific symptoms, including: a fever, a headache, disturbed sleep, poor feeding, irritability, vomiting, diarrhea. Heatstroke typically occurs when a person’s body temperature rises above 40°C (104°F) after prolonged exposure to heat. People may also develop heatstroke by physical overexertion in high temperatures. Neurological symptoms, such as seizures and confusion, typically accompany heatstroke. Heatstroke is a serious condition that can be life-threatening if left untreated. Anyone who experiences any symptoms of heatstroke must seek medical attention immediately. Heatstroke can develop progressively. Sometimes, a person may not notice the symptoms of heat-related illnesses developing, as they can appear very similar. However, the illness may progress from heat exhaustion, heat injury, to life-threatening heatstroke. Symptoms may include: a headache, cramping, fatigue, dizziness, nausea, vomiting . Once the heat-related illness affects the organs or central nervous system, the person has likely progressed to heatstroke. According to the US. Department of Health and Humans Services, some people may experience mild side effects soon after getting vaccinated. These may include: a headache, a mild fever, chills, fatigue, pain, swelling, and redness on the affected area, muscle aches, joint aches. These side effects are likely to disappear quickly without medical intervention or medication. Some people may experience flu-like symptoms when starting a new medication. Flu-like symptoms may include: a fever, a headache, chills, muscle aches, a cough, sore throat, runny nose, fatigue, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea . Some anticancer medications, such as interferon and interleukin, can cause flu-like symptoms. Other drugs that may cause flu-like symptoms include the tuberculosis medications rifapentine and isoniazid. Flu-like symptoms may last for a few hours or a few days. Cancer has many different symptoms, but not everyone will experience all of them. Sometimes cancer can occur without any symptoms at all. Some signs and symptoms of cancer may include: pain, including a headache, a fever, unexplained weight loss, fatigue, skin changes , a cough, changes in bowel or bladder function, persistent sores that do not heal, white patches on the tongue, unusual bleeding or discharge, a lump. Specific types of cancers may present with other symptoms. The treatment for headache and fever depends on its cause. If a person has bacterial meningitis, the doctor may prescribe antibiotics. Other treatments involve supportive care to make the person feel more comfortable. Some people may require: airway management , oxygenation, intravenous fluids, antipyretics to control fever . In most situations, the flu will go away without medical intervention. Some people may wish to take medications, such as antipyretics, to reduce their fever. Antipyretics, such as acetaminophen, are also pain relievers and can help reduce headaches. People usually do not require antiviral medications. Some people may require treatment or prevention with antivirals. When an outbreak occurs in a healthcare facility, such as a long-term care facility, doctors may prescribe antivirals to all residents. Doctors may recommend that people with sinus infections use humidifiers, nasal washes, and nasal decongestants to reduce symptoms. Some people, however, may require topical or oral steroids to reduce inflammation in the nasal passages. Depending on the severity of the infection, the symptoms, and a variety of other factors, doctors may prescribe antibiotics. Doctors may not always prescribe antibiotics for children with ear infections. Some doctors suggest watchful waiting at first and only prescribe an antibiotic treatment if the ear infection does not resolve. To control pain and fever, doctors will likely recommend pain relievers, such as acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs), such as aspirin and ibuprofen. If a healthcare provider decides antibiotics are necessary, they will choose the appropriate one based on a person’s allergies, the severity of the infection, the presence of other symptoms or infections, and any resistance that might be present in their area. To treat heatstroke, a medical team will check the person’s airway, breathing, and circulation. They will then provide rapid cooling to prevent further damage to internal organs. In most cases, doctors will ensure the individual is hydrated. To prevent getting sick from bacteria or viruses, doctors suggest that people practice frequent and proper handwashing. If a vaccine is available and indicated for a specific condition, doctors recommend that people should have the shot. The most effective way to treat heatstroke is prevention. Wearing appropriate clothing and rescheduling strenuous outdoor work or activities in hot and humid weather are two effective strategies to prevent heat-related illnesses. Ear infections are common in babies and children. Sometimes doctors may recommend watchful waiting to see if the infection goes away. Although fever and headache are common symptoms in babies and children, they may be unable to express feelings of a headache. Parents and guardians should check for other signs when a child has a fever, such as excessive fatigue, lack of appetite, vomiting, among others. Antipyretics and pain relievers may help, but parents should seek medical attention first. Babies and children may also develop meningitis, which can be life-threatening. If antipyretics and pain relievers are not successful in controlling fever or headache, people need to seek medical attention. Typically, fever and headaches are temporary symptoms, so people with persistent fever and headache must also consult a doctor. Anyone with a temperature above 39. 5°C (103. 1°F) should strongly consider seeking medical attention or call a healthcare provider to discuss the other symptoms. Headache and fever are unspecific symptoms because they have associations with a variety of conditions and diseases. They are also common side effects of many different treatments. Some people may be concerned went they develop a headache and a fever at the same time, but most often it is not due to anything serious. Anyone experiencing unexplained symptoms should speak with a doctor or other healthcare provider. When antipyretic drugs and pain relievers do not help to lower a fever or control headaches, the person should speak to a doctor who may be able to recommend a more suitable treatment.