Different parts of Medicare cover various aspects of care for people with COVID-19. However, a person may still have to pay certain deductibles or coinsurance. The coronavirus pandemic has generated uncertainty and anxiety around accessing essential health services. However, people with Medicare do have access to testing and treatment. This can help them take the necessary steps to reduce the risk of transmitting and contracting the virus. This article explains which parts of Medicare cover coronavirus testing and treatment. It also explores how people can manage their expectations regarding out-of-pocket costs. We may use a few terms in this piece that it can be helpful to understand when selecting the best insurance plan: Deductible: This is an annual amount of money that a person must spend out of pocket within a certain time period before an insurer starts to fund their treatments. Coinsurance: This is a percentage of a treatment cost that a person will need to self-fund. For Medicare Part B, this comes to 20%. Copayment: This is a fixed dollar amount that an insured person pays when receiving certain treatments. For Medicare, this usually applies to prescription drugs. . Medicare covers the costs of coronavirus testing. A coronavirus test rules out or confirms suspected infection with the novel coronavirus that causes COVID-19. When a physician or requesting healthcare provider deems the test medically necessary, Medicare Part B will cover the cost. Usually, there is no coinsurance for the test. Various types of facility can perform this testing, depending on the services available nearby. These might include a hospital, a doctor’s office, or a drive-through testing site. Medicare covers the cost regardless of the type of testing site. Currently, no specific Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved treatment is available for COVID-19. However, doctors can treat the complications of the disease, such as pneumonia. Supportive care is also available to help manage the symptoms. Supportive care may vary and can include the following: oral pain medications, intravenous fluids, antibiotics, medications to improve breathing. Sometimes, Medicare provides funds from Part A, which covers inpatient hospital care. In other instances, Medicare Part B will pay. This part is responsible for medical costs and doctor’s consultations. For example, Medicare Part B covers a doctor’s visit related to coronavirus treatment. Also, not all doctor’s visits need to be face-to-face for Medicare to cover the cost. Self-isolation measures advise that people showing symptoms should stay at home. Due to this public health emergency, Medicare has also temporarily expanded telehealth coverage. Telehealth coverage now also includes a virtual consultation. Coronavirus treatment may also require inpatient hospital care. Medicare Part A covers necessary hospitalizations for coronavirus treatment. The 2020 Medicare Part A deductible is $1,408 for the first 60 days of treatment. The copayment for each day between the 61st and 90th day of treatment is $352. People who need to remain in quarantine while in the hospital do not have to pay the additional deductible for the days they spend isolated, even if they receive no treatment. Although clinical trials have now begun, no coronavirus vaccine is currently available. When an FDA-approved vaccine becomes available, Medicare will cover the cost. Learn more about coronavirus here. It is difficult to state what the costs of COVID-19 are at an individual level. For example, several factors play a role in medical expenses due to coronavirus, such as the severity of the illness. Medical costs are also not the only possible expense with links to coronavirus. Indeed, the global nature of the virus has impacted the travel plans and financial situations of many people around the world. The possible costs of coronavirus may include the following: In some cases, people with coronavirus require hospitalization. Research into the percentage of people with COVID-19 who require hospital care is ongoing. For this reason, exact hospitalization rates are not fully known. Typically, longer hospital stays lead to higher costs. Intensive care treatment, including the use of a ventilator or bi-level positive airway pressure machine, also adds to the overall cost of treatment. Various American states have issued a stay-at-home order, which requires nonessential businesses to shut down. Individuals with a Medicare plan who remain employed may lose wages during this shutdown. Also, people in essential jobs who get sick or have to self-isolate due to exposure may lose income. At present, Medicare does not fund or replace lost earnings. With international and regional travel restrictions in place, people may lose travel fares, such as flight and hotel fees. Since Medicare does not cover costs related to lost wages or travel, a person should contact their state employment insurance agency about lost wages. Additionally, people should review their travel insurance policy or contact the relevant travel company to discuss refunds or amendments on tickets. Getting through this pandemic involves each person doing their very best to avoid contracting and transmitting the virus. It is especially vital that older adults avoid the virus, as they have a higher risk of complications than younger people if they develop COVID-19. Many people enrolled in Medicare are 65 years of age or older. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), people with underlying health conditions — such as diabetes, heart disease, or chronic lung disease — also have a higher risk of COVID-19-related complications. The CDC have issued the following recommendations to prevent infection with coronavirus: Older adults and people with an underlying health condition must practice physical distancing and stay home as much as posisble. , People should wash their hands frequently, especially after being out in public. It is best to apply soap and warm water before lathering for a minimum of 20 seconds. , Use a hand sanitizer with 60% alcohol when soap and water are not available. , Avoid touching the nose, eyes, and mouth as much as possible. , People should clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces, such as light switches, doorknobs, and faucets. Avoid physical contact with any person who shows symptoms. , Clean cell phones often to remove germs. , If possible, avoid touching shared public surfaces that are likely to have regular contact, such as handrails and door handles. Instead, it is best to use a tissue or glove to touch these surfaces. . It is also vital to follow the advice, recommendations, and mandates by local health officials to prevent the spread of the virus. The coronavirus pandemic continues to evolve and spread. Medicare Part B covers coronavirus testing, and Medicare Part A covers hospital stays for coronavirus treatment. Copayments and deductibles still apply for treatment. However, Medicare is regularly monitoring its criteria and policies to respond to the public health requirements. People with a Medicare Advantage plan should check the most up-to-date information on coverage with their insurance provider. Stay informed with live updates on the current COVID-19 outbreak and visit our coronavirus hub for more advice on prevention and treatment.