Medicare Part C, or Medicare Advantage, is a bundled alternative to traditional Medicare that includes coverage for parts A and B. People with Medicare Part C still have to pay their monthly premium for Part B, but they may get Part A without a monthly charge. A standalone Part C premium may also apply. More and more people are opting for these types of plan, and there are now hundreds of Medicare Part C plans available. A person’s options will vary based on where they live and which services are available in that area. This article explains the potential costs and premiums of Medicare Part C, including the possible monthly fees, the out-of-pocket costs, and how to incorporate drug costs into coverage. We may use a few terms in this piece that it can be helpful to understand when selecting the best insurance plan: Deductible: This is an annual amount of money that a person must spend out-of-pocket within a certain time period before an insurer starts to fund their treatments. Coinsurance: This is a percentage of a treatment cost that a person will need to self-fund. For Medicare Part B, this comes to 20%. Copayment: This is a fixed dollar amount that an insured person pays when receiving certain treatments. For Medicare, this usually applies to prescription drugs. . A person with Medicare Part C will still pay a monthly Medicare Part B premium. They will also need to fund coinsurance payments and deductibles, depending on the healthcare services they use. As Part C is a bundled plan, it is important to consider the costs of each service available. The sections below will discuss these in more detail. Most people with Medicare receive Part A for free. Part A covers inpatient hospital services. A person must still pay a $1,408 deductible each benefit period when they need inpatient care. They are also subject to paying coinsurance if they require an extended hospital or inpatient stay. Learn more about Medicare Part A coverage here. A person with Medicare Part C will still need to pay the monthly Part B premium. For 2020, this premium amounts to $144. 60. The Social Security Administration will typically deduct this premium amount from a person’s check. If a person has Medicare Advantage, their plan will outline how much they pay for medical services under Part B. For example, Medicare has contracts with specific local providers to offer medical services. Some plans charge a copayment if a person visits an out-of-network provider. Each Medicare Advantage plan has an out-of-pocket maximum spending limit. Once a person reaches this, they will not be responsible for any coinsurance or copayments for the rest of that enrollment year. In 2020, this limit ranges from $3,401 to $6,700, depending on the type of policy a person has. Learn more about Medicare Part B coverage here. As well as paying the Part B deductible, a person with Medicare Part C will pay a monthly premium. Some premiums are $0. The monthly premium varies based on the type of plan and the coverage offered. For 2019, the average monthly premium cost for all Medicare Advantage plan types was $29, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). This was a decrease from 2018, during which the average overall premium was $34. Different Medicare Advantage plan types are available. They vary by deductible, coinsurance, and out-of-pocket limits. A person should look over their last year of healthcare costs to work out the cost effectiveness of a Medicare Part C plan. They should also consider how much they could afford to pay if they were to suddenly need significant medical care. For targeted cost estimates based on a person’s local services, they can visit the Medicare Part C search engine on Medicare. gov. Around 88% of Medicare Advantage enrollees choose to add a Medicare Part D benefit through their plan, according to the KFF. Medicare Part D is the portion of Medicare that funds prescription drugs. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services require that all people aged 65 years and over have “ creditable drug coverage ” for their prescriptions. By having Medicare Part D, a person can meet this requirement. If they do not have Part D, they may have to pay penalty fees if they try to sign up for it at a later date. If a person does not choose to cover prescription drugs through their Medicare Part C plan, they will need to purchase a separate Part D policy. If a person already has prescription drug coverage through Medicare Part C, they do not need an additional Part D policy. There were several changes to prescription drug coverage and related costs between the 2019 and 2020 enrollment years. In 2020, Part D costs take the following shape: A person will need to meet the Part D deductible that their Medicare Advantage plan sets. In 2019, the average Medicare Advantage deductible was $121 for prescription drug coverage, according to the KFF. However, in 2020, the deductible could be up to $435 before a person begins to pay their copayments or coinsurance. Once a person meets their deductible, they will pay coinsurance for medications. This should come to no more than 25% of the total drug cost, up to a limit of $4,020. , Once a person reaches the $4,020 spending limit, they become responsible for their drug costs. This coverage gap is known as the “ donut hole. ” However, Medicare has an arrangement with drug manufacturers to provide these medications at no more than 25% of the original cost. Once a person spends $6,350 in the donut hole, they pay 5% of prescription drug costs. . Each Medicare Part C plan has a different list of drugs, called a formulary. This list separates medications into categories, including generic, brand name, and premium drugs. If a doctor prescribes generic drugs under a person’s Medicare Part C plan, the person will save on medication costs. Read our in-depth guide on the Medicare donut hole here. Medicare Part C, or Medicare Advantage, is a bundled Medicare plan. Private insurance companies sell and administer Part C plans, but they work with Medicare to make sure that they provide the full benefits available. The private insurance companies work with Medicare to offer parts A and B, as well as some additional services, such as Part D. Some Part C plans also fund services that traditional Medicare may not cover, such as vision care. An estimated 34% of all people enrolled in Medicare are covered under Medicare Advantage plans, according to the KFF. The number of people with Medicare Advantage plans has doubled since 2010, reaching 22 million people in 2019. Learn more about Medicare Part C here. Medicare Part C is an alternative to traditional Medicare. Some people may choose a Medicare Part C plan for the following reasons: They have a medical condition that requires specific services and medications. Medicare Part C offers Special Needs Plans for people with specific conditions, such as congestive heart failure or diabetes. These targeted plans may provide cost savings to a person. , They need additional services that Medicare does not offer, such as hearing or vision care. They receive benefits under a group plan. Some employers and unions offer their retired employees a group plan under Medicare Advantage. These firms may provide additional services at a lower cost to their former employees. An estimated 20% of all Part C enrollees are part of an employer- or union-sponsored group plan, according to the KFF. . People tend to choose Part C over traditional Medicare if they are seeking greater cost savings, expanded coverage, or both. Some people prefer Medicare Part C for its potential cost savings or expanded coverages. For others, Medicare Part C is not as cost effective as traditional Medicare. A person’s overall health, geographical location, and specific medical needs usually factor into whether or not a plan is cost effective for them. Because so many Medicare Part C plans are now available, a person should thoroughly compare and consider each before making their selection. Learn more about traditional Medicare and Medicare Advantage here.