Hyperspermia is a condition that causes a person to produce a large amount of semen, which is a fluid that contains sperm. Semen leaves the body through the penis when a person ejaculates during orgasm. Hyperspermia is a relatively rare condition compared with other issues that affect sperm. It does not cause any physical changes or health conditions. However, it may reduce fertility. Anyone worried about their sperm production should see a doctor for testing. Read on to learn about the causes, symptoms, and treatment of hyperspermia. Hyperspermia is a condition that occurs when a person produces a larger volume of semen than normal. Doctors generally define this volume as more than 5. 5 milliliters (ml) per ejaculation, though some put the limit slightly higher at 6 ml per ejaculation. Semen is mainly a mixture of sperm from the testes and other fluids from the seminal vesicles and prostate. The penis ejaculates semen during orgasm, and these fluids help carry and fuel the sperm on its way to fertilize an egg. While the name hyperspermia indicates an increase in the sperm itself, this is not always the case. The increase in the volume of the semen may be due to the body producing more of the other fluids that make up semen. A study in the Journal of Reproduction and Contraception notes that most of the people in a test group who had hyperspermia had normal sperm parameters. Therefore, other liquids, such as those from the prostate and seminal vesicles, were responsible for the increase in semen volume. The cause of prolonged hyperspermia is still not well-known. It is normal for a person to experience temporary hyperspermia, such as after a period of abstinence, but the volume tends to return to a level within the normal range eventually. Some believe that there is potentially a link between prolonged hyperspermia and dietary and lifestyle habits, such as taking herbs or supplements to stimulate the sex organs. However, this theory remains largely unstudied. Other theories suggest that a low grade infection in the prostate causes inflammation in the area, which may increase fluid production or volume. However, the exact reason for the condition is unknown. The main sign of hyperspermia is the production of a larger amount of semen than usual. A person who has had hyperspermia for their whole life may not notice that their semen volume is large. Others may notice an increase in their semen volume, which could be a sign to see a doctor for a diagnosis. However, many people with the condition experience no other symptoms and may never know that they have it. In some cases, hyperspermia may cause low fertility. Some people with a high semen volume may actually have less sperm than normal in their ejaculate because other fluid in the semen dilutes the levels. This dilution negatively affects fertility. Low sperm count does not automatically make a person infertile, however. It is still possible for a person with hyperspermia to conceive. People with hyperspermia who have normal-to-high levels of sperm in their ejaculate will typically have no issues with fertility. Learn more about sperm count and fertility here. In many cases, people with hyperspermia require no treatment for the condition. However, if hyperspermia occurs alongside a low sperm count, it can negatively affect fertility. If a person with hyperspermia is trying to conceive, doctors may recommend one or more methods to help improve fertility, including:Some medications, such as estrogen receptor blockers, may help improve sperm count. Medications such as clomiphene citrate (Clomid) stimulate hormone production in the brain, which can increase sperm production. However, this is an off-label use of the drug, as no reliable studies have yet demonstrated its effectiveness. Assisted reproductive therapy (ART) refers to other treatments that doctors may use to increase a person’s chances of successful conception. These include processes such as in vitro fertilization (IVF) or intracytoplasmic sperm injection. In general, reproductive therapy involves mixing sperm and eggs outside of the body to allow fertilization and then adding the fertilized egg back into the uterus to grow. This process may help increase the chance of carrying a pregnancy to term. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimate that ART is responsible for the conception of 1. 7% of infants born in the United States. Anyone with concerns about their sperm production or fertility may wish to see a doctor for testing. The doctor is likely to carry out a physical examination of the reproductive system before using specific tests to confirm their diagnosis. If they find anything unusual in the reproductive system, the doctor may order an imaging test, such as an ultrasound, to investigate the issue. Doctors may also ask for a semen sample to analyze. Laboratory technicians will take the semen to check the total sperm count and the quality of the sperm. Doctors may draw blood to check for other causes of infertility, such as hormonal imbalances or low testosterone. Hyperspermia is a rare condition that generally does not affect a person’s health. Processes such as IVF can help if hyperspermia leads to fertility problems. Otherwise, hyperspermia generally causes no other symptoms or complications. If a person has concerns about their semen or sperm, they can speak to their doctor for testing and diagnosis.